text/0000-road-to-10.md, before:

- Feature Name: road-to-1.0
- Start Date: 2019-09-11
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Volta Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Volta 1.0 is on the horizon and we are working hard to finish the last few features needed before release! The remaining work on the path to Volta 1.0 is centered around making Volta both unobtrusive and scalable to teams of any size.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The 1.0 release of Volta means more than, "we implemented some high-impact functionality and finally closed some long-standing issues." From the beginning, Volta was built to empower engineers and engineering teams to build amazing JS applications without having to worry about their environment or tooling. For individual engineers, Volta unobtrusively makes sure your tooling is aligned with the rest of your team, allowing you to stay focused on your work. For engineering teams, Volta allows you to manage your infrastructure decision-making centrally without slowing down individual team members. When the team decides to change versions of Node, for example, that doesn't require explicit effort on the part of each developer. With version 1.0, we believe Volta delivers on the promise of making tool management disappear.

# Details
[details]: #details

Features that are outstanding for Volta 1.0:

## Upgrades

Implement a method for updating Volta, so that users can easily stay up-to-date. See https://github.com/volta-cli/rfcs/pull/37 for a more in-depth discussion of this feature.

## `npm link` / `yarn link`

When developing and testing the interaction of Node packages, `npm link` / `yarn link` are often used to allow one project to depend on a local version of another project. Unfortunately, the current behavior with Volta is unspecified. It works if you use `yarn link` and both projects are using the exact same version of Yarn. We should work out the story so that users can `link` between projects that use completely different Node / Yarn versions. See https://github.com/volta-cli/volta/issues/56

## Monorepos / Yarn Workspaces

Currently, Volta only looks at the first `package.json` it finds as the root of a project and stops looking at that point. This works for single-project repositories, but for monorepos (including with Yarn workspaces), it would make sense to support pinning Node / Yarn at a higher level. We should allow some method of specifying that a project inherits its platform from a different `package.json` to better support that workflow. See https://github.com/volta-cli/volta/issues/378

## Installing / Pinning npm (Complete)

We currently don't support Pinning or Installing a different version of `npm` than comes bundled with Node. This can be an issue at times, because some versions of Node shipped with a broken `npm`, forcing users to upgrade their Node if they want to change `npm` versions. Since we support pinning Yarn independent of the Node version, we should do the same for npm. See https://github.com/volta-cli/volta/issues/292

## Run Command (Complete)

For advanced or debugging use-cases, we should support a `volta run` command that allows users to specify the versions of Node, npm, and Yarn to use at the command line. This will allow users to override the platform detected by Volta, in cases where they explicitly want to pick a different version of Node. See https://github.com/volta-cli/volta/issues/546

## Documentation

As part of working towards 1.0, we should do a pass on our documentation and make sure that everything is up-to-date and accurate. We should also make sure that there aren't any major features that are missing documentation. This will improve the onboarding experience and allow new users to more easily discover how they can use Volta.

## Miscellaneous Polish

There are a few issues that are relatively small on their own, but combined represent a significant amount of work. Each of them represents polish that will make Volta more delightful to use. For example (not an exhaustive list):

* https://github.com/volta-cli/volta/issues/495
* https://github.com/volta-cli/volta/issues/425

# Critique
[critique]: #critique

## Shared Global Installs

A few Node tools (e.g. `yeoman` and `ts-node`) rely on global installs of packages that can be `require()`d in themselves, in order to allow for peer-dependencies or plugin-style architectures. Those projects don't currently work under Volta, since each tool installed with `volta install` is sandboxed and called without knowledge of the other tools. Additionally, there is a class of tools that don't use `require()`, but instead call out to other global tools directly, which expect a shared environment. We could support these use-cases in 1.0, however they seem to be relatively limited and not wide-spread. Given that the impact is lower since most tools don't operate in this manner, it seems reasonable that we don't require a fix as part of Volta 1.0.

## Yarn 2.0 / Plug'n'Play

Yarn recently released version 2.0, which comes with a number of structural changes to how Yarn works. The largest of those changes is that Yarn Plug'n'Play is the behavior by default, so to support Yarn 2.0, we would need to also support Yarn Plug'n'Play. However, Yarn Plug'n'Play itself appears to have a number of adoption issues and isn't widely used. Similarly, the transition to Yarn 2.0 has been limited within the community, so there doesn't appear to be a pressing need to support these features. Finally, we should be able to make internal changes to support Yarn 2.0 / PnP without anything that would be considered a breaking change, so it's something we can look to implement after 1.0, after the behavior stabilizes and adoption grows.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

- Are there any other issues / features that are important enough to be necessary for the 1.0 release?

Commit message:

Update outstanding features and add release timeline

text/0000-road-to-10.md, after:

- Feature Name: road-to-1.0
- Start Date: 2019-09-11
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Volta Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Volta 1.0 is on the horizon and we are working hard to finish the last few features needed before release! The remaining work on the path to Volta 1.0 is centered around making Volta both unobtrusive and scalable to teams of any size.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The 1.0 release of Volta means more than, "we implemented some high-impact functionality and finally closed some long-standing issues." From the beginning, Volta was built to empower engineers and engineering teams to build amazing JS applications without having to worry about their environment or tooling. For individual engineers, Volta unobtrusively makes sure your tooling is aligned with the rest of your team, allowing you to stay focused on your work. For engineering teams, Volta allows you to manage your infrastructure decision-making centrally without slowing down individual team members. When the team decides to change versions of Node, for example, that doesn't require explicit effort on the part of each developer. With version 1.0, we believe Volta delivers on the promise of making tool management disappear.

# Details
[details]: #details

Features that are outstanding for Volta 1.0:

## pnpm Support

Currently, Volta only supports npm and Yarn for package managers, as they are the two most popular. [pnpm](https://pnpm.js.org/) is a relative newcomer to the space, however it is growing in adoption and we have received multiple requests to support it within Volta.

## `npm update -g` / `yarn global upgrade`

With the changes to support installing packages directly with `npm install -g` or `yarn global add`, we almost have full support for global operations. However, one area that is missing is the global upgrade command, which allows you to upgrade some or all of your global packages. We should correctly intercept that command and set the environment up to correctly upgrade packages within Volta's model.

## `npm link` / `yarn link`

When developing and testing the interaction of Node packages, `npm link` / `yarn link` are often used to allow one project to depend on a local version of another project. Unfortunately, the current behavior with Volta is unspecified. It works if you use `yarn link` and both projects are using the exact same version of Yarn. We should work out the story so that users can `link` between projects that use completely different Node / Yarn versions. See https://github.com/volta-cli/volta/issues/56

## Signed Installer

As part of moving to 1.0, we should acquire a code signing certificate so that we can digitally sign the Windows installer (and any future installers we wind up wanting to create). This is complicated a bit by the fact that there don't seem to be any certificate authorities that support open-source organizations for code signing, only individuals or companies.

## Documentation

We should do a pass on our documentation and make sure that everything is up-to-date and accurate. We should also make sure that there aren't any major features that are missing documentation. This will improve the onboarding experience and allow new users to more easily discover how they can use Volta.

# Timeline
[timeline]: #timeline

Given the set of outstanding features, the target for 1.0 is to have a release candidate available by Wednesday, December 16. Then, assuming there are no major problems found, the official release would come on Monday, December 21.

# Critique
[critique]: #critique

## Yarn 2.0 / Plug'n'Play

Yarn recently released version 2.0, which comes with a number of structural changes to how Yarn works. The largest of those changes is that Yarn Plug'n'Play is the behavior by default, so to support Yarn 2.0, we would need to also support Yarn Plug'n'Play. However, Yarn Plug'n'Play itself appears to have a number of adoption issues and isn't widely used. Similarly, the transition to Yarn 2.0 has been limited within the community, so there doesn't appear to be a pressing need to support these features. Finally, we should be able to make internal changes to support Yarn 2.0 / PnP without anything that would be considered a breaking change, so it's something we can look to implement after 1.0, after the behavior stabilizes and adoption grows.

## Apple Silicon Support

The new Apple processors are available in laptops and showing lots of promise. Though we should support native builds on those processors, currently Volta works correctly under Rosetta 2, so this isn't a blocker for a 1.0 release. When we do add support, we also need to take into account that we may need to fall back to downloading x64 versions of Node on Apple devices, since there may not be native builds available for older versions of Node.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

- Are there any other issues / features that are important enough to be necessary for the 1.0 release?
