text/0000-informational-commands.md, before:

- Feature Name: informational_commands
- Start Date: 2019-05-15
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Notion Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Add an informational command, `volta list`, replacing the `volta current` command and expanding on its capabilities. The `list` command will allow users to see their default and project-specific toolchains, and will support both human-friendly output and a tool-friendly output.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Why are we doing this? What use cases does it support? What is the expected outcome?

# Pedagogy
[pedagogy]: #pedagogy

How should we explain and teach this feature to users? How should users understand this feature? This generally means:

- Introducing new named concepts.
- Explaining the feature largely in terms of examples.
- Explaining how users should _think_ about the feature, and how it should impact the way they use Notion. It should explain the impact as concretely as possible.
- If applicable, describe the differences between teaching this to existing Node programmers and new Node programmers.

It is not necessary to write the actual feature documentation in this section, but it should establish the concepts on which the documentation would be built.

# Details
[details]: #details

## User configuration

Throughout, we will assume the user has the following configuration for illustrative purposes:

- Node versions installed: v12.2.0, v11.9.0, v10.15.3 (default), v8.16.0
- Yarn versions installed: v1.16.0, v1.12.3 (default)
- Tools installed:
    - ember-cli: v3.10.0 (default) on Node v12.2.0, v3.8.2 on Node v12.2.0, with binary `ember`
    - typescript: v3.4.5 on Node v12.2.0, v3.0.3 (default) on Node v12.2.0, with binaries `tsc`, `tsserver`
    - create-react-app: v3.0.1 (default) on Node v12.2.0, with binary `create-react-app`
    - yarn-deduplicate: v1.1.1 on Node v12.2.0, with binary `yarn-deduplicate` (notice that this is not a *default*; assume the user ran `volta fetch` )

They also have two projects with the following pins:

- `~/node-only/package.json`:

    ```json
    {
      "volta": {
        "node": "v8.16.0",
      }
    }
    ```

- `~/node-and-yarn/package.json`:

    ```json
    {
      "volta": {
        "node": "v12.2.0",
        "yarn": "v1.16.0"
      }
    }
    ```

## CLI Command Design

The `volta list` command always prints the following information for a set of runtimes, packagers, and tools:

- name
- version
- whether it is the user's default or a project-pinned version
- for tools, the associated runtime and packager versions

The tool will support two modes initially: "human" and "plain", which include exactly the same information but presented in a  Both modes include the same information for runtimes, packagers, and tools: name, version, whether it is a default or project-specified version, and (for tools) the Node version and packager (i.e. platform).

- "human" mode, the default if the context is a user-facing terminal; also invokable with `--print=human` in any context.

- "plain" mode, the default if the context is not a user-facing terminal (e.g. when piped into another command); also invokable with `--print=plain` in any context. A simple plain text format which prints a line per runtime, packager, or tool, with space-separated output on each line.

    - runtimes:

        ```
        runtime node@<version>
        ```

    - packagers:

        ```
        packager (yarn|npm)@<version>
        ```

    - tools: 

        ```
        tool <tool name>@<tool version> [node@<version>] [<yarn|npm>@<version>] [(default|<project path>)]
        ```

Having these two modes should make it easy to add a JSON mode later (`--print=json`) if that proves desirable.

## CLI Command Variants

### `volta list` (no flags)

#### Human

The format is:

```sh
$ volta list
⚡️ Currently active toolchain:

    Node: version [(default|<project path>)]
    <packager>: <built-in|version> [(default|<project path>)]]
    Tool binaries available:
        <comma separated list|NONE>

See options for more detailed reports by running `volta list --help`.
```

<details><summary>Outside a project</summary>

```sh
$ volta list
⚡️ Currently active toolchain:

    Node: v8.16.0 (default)
    Yarn: v1.12.3 (default)
    Tool binaries available:
        create-react-app, ember, tsc, tsserver, yarn-deduplicate

See options for more detailed reports by running `volta list --help`.
```

</details>

<details><summary>In the `node-only` project</summary>

<b>Note:</b> this assumes the implementation of a fix for [volta-cli/volta#436](https://github.com/volta-cli/volta/issues/436).

```sh
$ volta list
⚡️ Currently active toolchain:

    Node: v8.16.0 (from `~/node-only/package.json`)
    Yarn: v1.12.3 (default)
    Tool binaries available:
        create-react-app, ember, tsc, tsserver, yarn-deduplicate

See options for more detailed reports by running `volta list --help`.
```

</details>

<details><summary>In the <code>node-and-yarn</code> project</summary>

```sh
$ volta list
⚡️ Currently active toolchain:

    Node: v12.2.0 (from `~/node-and-yarn/package.json`)
    Yarn: v1.16.0 (from `~/node-and-yarn/package.json`)
    Tool binaries available:
        create-react-app, ember, tsc, tsserver, yarn-deduplicate

See options for more detailed reports by running `volta list --help`.
```
    
</details>

#### Plain

The format is:

```sh
$ volta list
runtime node@<version> (default|<project path>)
packager <npm|yarn>@<version> (built-in|default|<project path>)
```

<details><summary>Outside a project</summary>

```sh
$ volta list
runtime node@v10.15.3 (default)
packager yarn@v1.12.3 (default)
```

</details>

<details><summary>In the `node-only` project</summary>

<b>Note:</b> this assumes the implementation of a fix for [volta-cli/volta#436](https://github.com/volta-cli/volta/issues/436).

```sh
$ volta list
runtime node@v8.16.0 (`~/node-only/package.json`)
packager yarn@v1.12.3 (default)
```

</details>

<details><summary>In the <code>node-and-yarn</code> project</summary>

```sh
$ volta list
node@v12.2.0 (`~/node-and-yarn/package.json`)
yarn@v1.16.0 (`~/node-and-yarn/package.json`)
```
    
</details>
    
### `volta list --all`

#### Human

The basic format is:

```sh
$ volta list --all
Node runtimes:
    <version> [(default|<project path>)]

Packagers:
    (Yarn|npm):
        <version> [(default|<project path>)]

Tools:
    <tool name>
        <version> [(default|<project path>)]
            binaries: [<binary name>]...
            platform:
                runtime: node@<version>
                packager: built-in npm|<npm|yarn>@<version>
```

<details><summary>Outside a project directory</summary>

```sh
$ volta list --all
Node runtimes:
    v12.2.0
    v11.9.0
    v10.15.3 (default)
    v8.16.0

Packagers:
    Yarn:
        v1.16.0 (default)
        v1.12.3

Tools:
    create-react-app:
        v3.0.1 (default)
            binaries: create-react-app
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
    ember-cli:
        v3.10.0 (default)
            binaries: ember
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
        v3.8.2
            binaries: ember
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
    tsc:
        v3.4.5
            binaries: tsc, tsserver
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
        v3.0.3 (default)
            binaries: tsc, tsserver
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
    yarn-deduplicate:
        v1.1.1 (default)
            binaries: yarn-deduplicate
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
```

</details>

<details><summary>In the <code>node-only</code> project</summary>

```sh
$ volta list --all
Node runtimes:
    v12.2.0
    v11.9.0
    v10.15.3 (default)
    v8.16.0 (current)

Packagers:
    Yarn:
        v1.16.0 (default)
        v1.12.3

Tools:
    create-react-app:
        v3.0.1 (default)
            binaries: create-react-app
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
    ember-cli:
        v3.10.0 (default)
            binaries: ember
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
        v3.8.2
            binaries: ember
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
    tsc:
        v3.4.5
            binaries: tsc, tsserver
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
        v3.0.3 (default)
            binaries: tsc, tsserver
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
    yarn-deduplicate:
        v1.1.1 (default)
            binaries: yarn-deduplicate
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
```

</details>

<details><summary>In the <code>node-and-yarn</code> project</summary>

```sh
$ volta list --all
Node runtimes:
    v12.2.0 (`~/node-and-yarn/project.json`)
    v11.9.0
    v10.15.3 (default)
    v8.16.0

Packagers:
    Yarn:
        v1.16.0 (default)
        v1.12.3 (`~/node-and-yarn/project.json`)

Tools:
    create-react-app:
        v3.0.1 (default)
            binaries: create-react-app
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
    ember-cli:
        v3.10.0 (default)
            binaries: ember
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
        v3.8.2
            binaries: ember
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
    tsc:
        v3.4.5
            binaries: tsc, tsserver
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
        v3.0.3 (default)
            binaries: tsc, tsserver
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
    yarn-deduplicate:
        v1.1.1 (default)
            binaries: yarn-deduplicate
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
```

</details>

#### Plain

<details><summary></summary>

```sh
$ volta list --all
runtime node@v12.2.0
runtime node@v11.9.0
runtime node@v10.15.3 (default)
runtime node@v8.16.0
packager yarn@v1.16.0
packager yarn@v1.12.3 (default)
tool create-react-app@v3.0.1 (default) / node@v12.2.0
tool ember-cli@v3.10.0 (default) / node@v12.2.0
tool ember-cli@v3.8.2 / node@v12.2.0
tool typescript@v3.4.5 / node@v12.2.0
tool typescript@v3.0.3 (default) / node@v12.2.0
tool yarn-deduplicate@v1.1.1 / node@v12.2.0
```

</details>

### `volta list <package>`

List all fetched versions of a specific package:

```sh
volta list <package>
```

<!-- TODO: remaining examples! -->

## Why `list`?

### Prior art

A brief survey of the broader developer ecosystem indicates that `list` is by far the most common (sub)command used in CLI tools for listing installed versions of tools. The only major exception is `nodenv`, which (reasonably) seems to treat the "list" action as implicit in the user's intention, given that nodenv serves *only* to manage specific versions of Node. `nvm` uses `ls` and `ls-remote`, which are standard Unix shortenings of "list."

The survey details:

- `nvm` (and the other `*vm` tools):
    - `ls` for installed versions
    - `ls-remote` for available versions

- `nodenv` (and the other `*env` tools) 
    - `versions`: list all installed versions
    - `version`: displays the currently-active version *and* how it was set
    - `local`: list/set the version specified for a given directory tree, if any
    - `global`: list/set the version specified for a global default, if any
    - `shell`: list/set the version specified for a given shell, if any

- [`dotnet`](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet?tabs=netcore21)
    - [`tool list`](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-tool-list), which requires either
        - `-g, --global` -> lists “user-wide Global tools”; mutually exclusive with `--tool-path` variant
        - `--tool-path <path>` -> a custom path to look for global tools; mutually exclusive with `--global` variant

- [Chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org):
    - `list`: searches for both local and remote packages, alias for `search`
        - `-l, --lo, --localonly, --local-only`: only items on the local machine
        - `-a, --all, --allversions, --all-versions`: results from all versions
        - `--version=VALUE`: only this specific version match
        - ` -e, --exact`: only exact matches for the name
    - `info` for displaying details about a specific installed package

- [Homebrew](https://brew.sh):
    - `list`, `ls`
    - takes a variety of arguments to limit the output:
        - `--full-name`: give fully-qualified names
        - `--versions`: show version number, takes an optional list of packages
        - `--multiple`: only packages that have multiple versions installed
        - `--pinned`: only for pinned formulae (things brew won’t upgrade without forcing)
    - `info` for displaying 

- [Scoop](https://scoop.sh):
    - `list`

- apt:
    - `list`, lists `<source>/<package>,<package> <version> <arch>`
    - explicitly does not have a stable CLI

- yum:
    - `list`: List package names from repositories
        - `list available`: List all available packages
        - `list installed`: List all installed packages
        - `list all`: List installed and available packages
        - `list kernel`: List installed and available kernel packages
    - `info`: Display information about a package

## Deprecating `volta current`

Since `volta list` subsumes (and substantially extends upon) the functionality of `volta current`, `volta current` should be deprecated when `volta list` is implemented. The deprecation should include a warning that the command will be removed in a future version and information about how to use `volta list --current <tool>` as a replacement.

<!--
This is the technical portion of the RFC. Explain the design in sufficient detail that:

- Its interaction with other features is clear.
- It is reasonably clear how the feature would be implemented.
- Corner cases are dissected by example.

This section should return to the examples given in the previous section, and explain more fully how the detailed proposal makes those examples work.
-->

# Critique
[critique]: #critique

This section discusses the tradeoffs considered in this proposal. This must include an honest accounting of the drawbacks of the proposal, as well as list out all the alternatives that were considered and rationale for why this proposal was chosen over the alternatives. This section should address questions such as:

- Why is this design the best in the space of possible designs?
- What other designs have been considered and what is the rationale for not choosing them?
- What is the impact of not doing this?

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

- Should the bare `list` command include:

    - all available package binaries?
    - a subset of package binaries once the number crosses a threshold, with instructions about how to see all?
    - no package binaries?

    And how should that be presented in `plain` vs. `human` mode?

<!-- 
- What parts of the design do you expect to resolve through the RFC process before this gets merged?
- What parts of the design do you expect to resolve through the implementation of this feature before stabilization?
- What related issues do you consider out of scope for this RFC that could be addressed in the future independently of the solution that comes out of this RFC?
-->

Commit message:

volta list: clarify the print modes.

text/0000-informational-commands.md, after:

- Feature Name: informational_commands
- Start Date: 2019-05-15
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Volta Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Add an informational command, `volta list`, replacing the `volta current` command and expanding on its capabilities. The `list` command will allow users to see their default and project-specific toolchains, and will support both human-friendly output and a tool-friendly output.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Why are we doing this? What use cases does it support? What is the expected outcome?

# Pedagogy
[pedagogy]: #pedagogy

How should we explain and teach this feature to users? How should users understand this feature? This generally means:

- Introducing new named concepts.
- Explaining the feature largely in terms of examples.
- Explaining how users should _think_ about the feature, and how it should impact the way they use Notion. It should explain the impact as concretely as possible.
- If applicable, describe the differences between teaching this to existing Node programmers and new Node programmers.

It is not necessary to write the actual feature documentation in this section, but it should establish the concepts on which the documentation would be built.

# Details
[details]: #details

## User configuration

Throughout, we will assume the user has the following configuration for illustrative purposes:

- Node versions installed: v12.2.0, v11.9.0, v10.15.3 (default), v8.16.0
- Yarn versions installed: v1.16.0, v1.12.3 (default)
- Tools installed:
    - ember-cli: v3.10.0 (default) on Node v12.2.0, v3.8.2 on Node v12.2.0, with binary `ember`
    - typescript: v3.4.5 on Node v12.2.0, v3.0.3 (default) on Node v12.2.0, with binaries `tsc`, `tsserver`
    - create-react-app: v3.0.1 (default) on Node v12.2.0, with binary `create-react-app`
    - yarn-deduplicate: v1.1.1 on Node v12.2.0, with binary `yarn-deduplicate` (notice that this is not a *default*; assume the user ran `volta fetch` )

They also have two projects with the following pins:

- `~/node-only/package.json`:

    ```json
    {
      "volta": {
        "node": "v8.16.0",
      }
    }
    ```

- `~/node-and-yarn/package.json`:

    ```json
    {
      "volta": {
        "node": "v12.2.0",
        "yarn": "v1.16.0"
      }
    }
    ```

## CLI Command Design

The `volta list` command always prints the following information for a set of runtimes, packagers, and tools:

- name
- version
- whether it is the user's default or a project-pinned version
- for tools, the associated runtime and packager versions

The tool will support multiple modes (two initially), which include exactly the same information but presented in different human- or machine-friendly formats. All modes include the same information for runtimes, packagers, and tools: name, version, whether it is a default or project-specified version, and (for tools) the Node version and packager (i.e. platform).

- "human" mode, the default if the context is a user-facing terminal; also invokable with `--print=human` in any context. An indented listing of the user's current runtime, packager (if specified), and any installed binaries. See the detailed sections below for examples of the format.

- "plain" mode, the default if the context is not a user-facing terminal (e.g. when piped into another command); also invokable with `--print=plain` in any context. A simple plain text format which prints a line per runtime, packager, or tool, with space-separated output on each line.

    - runtimes:

        ```
        runtime node@<version>
        ```

    - packagers:

        ```
        packager (yarn|npm)@<version>
        ```

    - tools: 

        ```
        tool <tool name>@<tool version> [node@<version>] [<yarn|npm>@<version>] [(default|<project path>)]
        ```

This RFC does not propose, but allows for the possibility of, a JSON mode (`--print=json`) or similar at a later time if that proves desirable.

## CLI Command Variants

### `volta list` (no flags)

#### Human

The format is:

```sh
$ volta list
⚡️ Currently active toolchain:

    Node: version [(default|<project path>)]
    <packager>: <built-in|version> [(default|<project path>)]]
    Tool binaries available:
        <comma separated list|NONE>

See options for more detailed reports by running `volta list --help`.
```

<details><summary>Outside a project</summary>

```sh
$ volta list
⚡️ Currently active toolchain:

    Node: v8.16.0 (default)
    Yarn: v1.12.3 (default)
    Tool binaries available:
        create-react-app, ember, tsc, tsserver, yarn-deduplicate

See options for more detailed reports by running `volta list --help`.
```

</details>

<details><summary>In the `node-only` project</summary>

<b>Note:</b> this assumes the implementation of a fix for [volta-cli/volta#436](https://github.com/volta-cli/volta/issues/436).

```sh
$ volta list
⚡️ Currently active toolchain:

    Node: v8.16.0 (from `~/node-only/package.json`)
    Yarn: v1.12.3 (default)
    Tool binaries available:
        create-react-app, ember, tsc, tsserver, yarn-deduplicate

See options for more detailed reports by running `volta list --help`.
```

</details>

<details><summary>In the <code>node-and-yarn</code> project</summary>

```sh
$ volta list
⚡️ Currently active toolchain:

    Node: v12.2.0 (from `~/node-and-yarn/package.json`)
    Yarn: v1.16.0 (from `~/node-and-yarn/package.json`)
    Tool binaries available:
        create-react-app, ember, tsc, tsserver, yarn-deduplicate

See options for more detailed reports by running `volta list --help`.
```
    
</details>

#### Plain

The format is:

```sh
$ volta list
runtime node@<version> (default|<project path>)
packager <npm|yarn>@<version> (built-in|default|<project path>)
```

<details><summary>Outside a project</summary>

```sh
$ volta list
runtime node@v10.15.3 (default)
packager yarn@v1.12.3 (default)
```

</details>

<details><summary>In the `node-only` project</summary>

<b>Note:</b> this assumes the implementation of a fix for [volta-cli/volta#436](https://github.com/volta-cli/volta/issues/436).

```sh
$ volta list
runtime node@v8.16.0 (`~/node-only/package.json`)
packager yarn@v1.12.3 (default)
```

</details>

<details><summary>In the <code>node-and-yarn</code> project</summary>

```sh
$ volta list
node@v12.2.0 (`~/node-and-yarn/package.json`)
yarn@v1.16.0 (`~/node-and-yarn/package.json`)
```
    
</details>
    
### `volta list --all`

#### Human

The basic format is:

```sh
$ volta list --all
Node runtimes:
    <version> [(default|<project path>)]

Packagers:
    (Yarn|npm):
        <version> [(default|<project path>)]

Tools:
    <tool name>
        <version> [(default|<project path>)]
            binaries: [<binary name>]...
            platform:
                runtime: node@<version>
                packager: built-in npm|<npm|yarn>@<version>
```

<details><summary>Outside a project directory</summary>

```sh
$ volta list --all
Node runtimes:
    v12.2.0
    v11.9.0
    v10.15.3 (default)
    v8.16.0

Packagers:
    Yarn:
        v1.16.0 (default)
        v1.12.3

Tools:
    create-react-app:
        v3.0.1 (default)
            binaries: create-react-app
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
    ember-cli:
        v3.10.0 (default)
            binaries: ember
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
        v3.8.2
            binaries: ember
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
    tsc:
        v3.4.5
            binaries: tsc, tsserver
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
        v3.0.3 (default)
            binaries: tsc, tsserver
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
    yarn-deduplicate:
        v1.1.1 (default)
            binaries: yarn-deduplicate
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
```

</details>

<details><summary>In the <code>node-only</code> project</summary>

```sh
$ volta list --all
Node runtimes:
    v12.2.0
    v11.9.0
    v10.15.3 (default)
    v8.16.0 (current)

Packagers:
    Yarn:
        v1.16.0 (default)
        v1.12.3

Tools:
    create-react-app:
        v3.0.1 (default)
            binaries: create-react-app
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
    ember-cli:
        v3.10.0 (default)
            binaries: ember
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
        v3.8.2
            binaries: ember
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
    tsc:
        v3.4.5
            binaries: tsc, tsserver
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
        v3.0.3 (default)
            binaries: tsc, tsserver
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
    yarn-deduplicate:
        v1.1.1 (default)
            binaries: yarn-deduplicate
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
```

</details>

<details><summary>In the <code>node-and-yarn</code> project</summary>

```sh
$ volta list --all
Node runtimes:
    v12.2.0 (`~/node-and-yarn/project.json`)
    v11.9.0
    v10.15.3 (default)
    v8.16.0

Packagers:
    Yarn:
        v1.16.0 (default)
        v1.12.3 (`~/node-and-yarn/project.json`)

Tools:
    create-react-app:
        v3.0.1 (default)
            binaries: create-react-app
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
    ember-cli:
        v3.10.0 (default)
            binaries: ember
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
        v3.8.2
            binaries: ember
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
    tsc:
        v3.4.5
            binaries: tsc, tsserver
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
        v3.0.3 (default)
            binaries: tsc, tsserver
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
    yarn-deduplicate:
        v1.1.1 (default)
            binaries: yarn-deduplicate
            platform:
                runtime: node@v12.2.0
                packager: built-in npm
```

</details>

#### Plain

<details><summary></summary>

```sh
$ volta list --all
runtime node@v12.2.0
runtime node@v11.9.0
runtime node@v10.15.3 (default)
runtime node@v8.16.0
packager yarn@v1.16.0
packager yarn@v1.12.3 (default)
tool create-react-app@v3.0.1 (default) / node@v12.2.0
tool ember-cli@v3.10.0 (default) / node@v12.2.0
tool ember-cli@v3.8.2 / node@v12.2.0
tool typescript@v3.4.5 / node@v12.2.0
tool typescript@v3.0.3 (default) / node@v12.2.0
tool yarn-deduplicate@v1.1.1 / node@v12.2.0
```

</details>

### `volta list <package>`

List all fetched versions of a specific package:

```sh
volta list <package>
```

<!-- TODO: remaining examples! -->

## Why `list`?

### Prior art

A brief survey of the broader developer ecosystem indicates that `list` is by far the most common (sub)command used in CLI tools for listing installed versions of tools. The only major exception is `nodenv`, which (reasonably) seems to treat the "list" action as implicit in the user's intention, given that nodenv serves *only* to manage specific versions of Node. `nvm` uses `ls` and `ls-remote`, which are standard Unix shortenings of "list."

The survey details:

- `nvm` (and the other `*vm` tools):
    - `ls` for installed versions
    - `ls-remote` for available versions

- `nodenv` (and the other `*env` tools) 
    - `versions`: list all installed versions
    - `version`: displays the currently-active version *and* how it was set
    - `local`: list/set the version specified for a given directory tree, if any
    - `global`: list/set the version specified for a global default, if any
    - `shell`: list/set the version specified for a given shell, if any

- [`dotnet`](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet?tabs=netcore21)
    - [`tool list`](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-tool-list), which requires either
        - `-g, --global` -> lists “user-wide Global tools”; mutually exclusive with `--tool-path` variant
        - `--tool-path <path>` -> a custom path to look for global tools; mutually exclusive with `--global` variant

- [Chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org):
    - `list`: searches for both local and remote packages, alias for `search`
        - `-l, --lo, --localonly, --local-only`: only items on the local machine
        - `-a, --all, --allversions, --all-versions`: results from all versions
        - `--version=VALUE`: only this specific version match
        - ` -e, --exact`: only exact matches for the name
    - `info` for displaying details about a specific installed package

- [Homebrew](https://brew.sh):
    - `list`, `ls`
    - takes a variety of arguments to limit the output:
        - `--full-name`: give fully-qualified names
        - `--versions`: show version number, takes an optional list of packages
        - `--multiple`: only packages that have multiple versions installed
        - `--pinned`: only for pinned formulae (things brew won’t upgrade without forcing)
    - `info` for displaying 

- [Scoop](https://scoop.sh):
    - `list`

- apt:
    - `list`, lists `<source>/<package>,<package> <version> <arch>`
    - explicitly does not have a stable CLI

- yum:
    - `list`: List package names from repositories
        - `list available`: List all available packages
        - `list installed`: List all installed packages
        - `list all`: List installed and available packages
        - `list kernel`: List installed and available kernel packages
    - `info`: Display information about a package

## Deprecating `volta current`

Since `volta list` subsumes (and substantially extends upon) the functionality of `volta current`, `volta current` should be deprecated when `volta list` is implemented. The deprecation should include a warning that the command will be removed in a future version and information about how to use `volta list --current <tool>` as a replacement.

<!--
This is the technical portion of the RFC. Explain the design in sufficient detail that:

- Its interaction with other features is clear.
- It is reasonably clear how the feature would be implemented.
- Corner cases are dissected by example.

This section should return to the examples given in the previous section, and explain more fully how the detailed proposal makes those examples work.
-->

# Critique
[critique]: #critique

This section discusses the tradeoffs considered in this proposal. This must include an honest accounting of the drawbacks of the proposal, as well as list out all the alternatives that were considered and rationale for why this proposal was chosen over the alternatives. This section should address questions such as:

- Why is this design the best in the space of possible designs?
- What other designs have been considered and what is the rationale for not choosing them?
- What is the impact of not doing this?

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

- Should the bare `list` command include:

    - all available package binaries?
    - a subset of package binaries once the number crosses a threshold, with instructions about how to see all?
    - no package binaries?

    And how should that be presented in `plain` vs. `human` mode?

<!-- 
- What parts of the design do you expect to resolve through the RFC process before this gets merged?
- What parts of the design do you expect to resolve through the implementation of this feature before stabilization?
- What related issues do you consider out of scope for this RFC that could be addressed in the future independently of the solution that comes out of this RFC?
-->
